
A Simple Guide to the Use of OpenContact

OpenContact allows the user to map the dominant residue-residue and atom-atom pair interactions from protein structure files that are supplied by the user. The pair interactions usually arise from a single file of the protein (intraprotein interactions) or multiple proteins (interprotein interactions) and their associated chains.  The structure files are often taken from the protein data bank and are generically designated as *.pdb files.  These somewhat complicated structure files are usually generated via x-ray crystallography or NMR methods.  Note that OpenContact will not map proteins and their chains that are not existing partners, i.e., bound, folded, or in intimate contact with one another, and it will not dynamically search for protein partners or any new structural arrangements.  This is a static mapping of existing protein(s) structure file(s), such as between chains or residues.  Note that you do not have to do any manipulations of the raw *.pdb files, since OpenContact will only take what it needs to do the mapping.  If you do not have a structure file in the *.pdb format, you can easily convert your file to the *.pdb format using a number of open source and commercial structure conversion codes. Most structure viewers allow you to save or export your structure file to a variety of different formats once they are opened, so this should not be a problem; simply export or save your structure file in the *.pdb format to use OpenContact.  OpenContact is currently restricted to only *.pdb files as input.

We assume here that you have already downloaded and unzipped the OpenContact zip file folder from the website to any folder on your desktop.

In the subfolder "dist" you will find the single executable "contact.exe".

Simply double-click on the file icon and the OpenContact screen will appear on your desktop.

You can now use the browse buttons to load your protein partners into the mapping algorithm.
The folder "Examples" from this download contains the *.pdb files used in the Protein journal publication (see # below for citation). For example, in the gp41 Example subfolder you can find the *.pdb file 1AIK.pdb.  In the contact mapping we select as Protein A 1AIK.pdb from the Examples folder and type C into the text box for the chain ID.  For Protein B we again select 1AIK.pdb but with chain ID equal to N.  Thus, we are mapping the C chain to the N chain of the same *.pdb file in this particular example.

Please use upper case for the Chain ID text box, since this particular part of the code is case sensitive.

Now, click on the Add button.

Then you simply click the browse button for the Output Destination folder and select the folder where you want to place your results. You must also select an identifier or filename convention for your output files such as the date, or time.  This identifier will be affixed to each of the output files to help the user keep track of of each mapping. For example, type %d in the text box provided to select the date as your identifier.  Now, simply click Run and the mapping will occur with the generated output files: coarseab.txt, coarseab.pdb, coarsedata.txt, and finedata.txt with the identifier affixed to the beginning of the filename.   If you want to re-run for any reason with the same input files and date, you will need to delete the existing files from the Output Destination folder or experience the dreaded Crash feature of Python programming! (This will not harm your computer; OpenContact simply shuts down.)

Now, you can view the *.pdb files with a variety of open source viewers, such as Rasmol (RasWin is the windows version) or commercial viewers.  The *.txt files are the bare text files from the mapping that you can open with any text editor such as Notepad++, or import it to one of the spreadsheets provided in the Examples folder, or plot with a commercial program such as Matlab, which is also shown in the Examples folder.  The spreadsheets already provided in the Examples folder can be easily used with the Refresh All feature of Excel.  After opening any example *.xlsx file in the Examples folder, simply click Refresh All under Data from the Excel(2007) menu bar and you will be asked for the new source of data.  Select your finedata.txt file to obtain manageable results.  Once selected, the *.txt file will automatically overwrite the data provided in the example spreadsheet, but make sure to highlight the left, uppermost data cell given first.  Similarly, the *.m Matlab file provided as an example in the Examples folder can be easily modified to your data set.  The *.txt and *.pdb output files provide the user with any number of further analysis capabilities, and please note that we are not advocating any particular software; these are just examples that we are providing.

Now, you also have the option of loading the results into our in-house Analysis feature that we have provided as part of OpenContact. Click on Load results into analysis prior to clicking "Run", or you can go to the Analysis view and open the *.pcr file generated from the Run execution. The *.pcr file will be present along with your *.pdb and *.txt files in your Output destination folder.  Note that you do not have to re-run the mapping in order to do the Analysis part of OpenContact.  You can always go back to the Analysis view any time to further study your system that you previously mapped from the run feature. Our in-house Analysis includes the open source plotting facility Matplotlib, where we have used the Contourf function to generate a 2-dimensional hot spot map of the interactions.  Both residues and atoms are given in the labeled axes and you can use the zoom feature to hone in on individual atom-atom interactions.  Note that Protein A is along the y-axis and Protein B is along the x-axis.  Because we thought it was important to provide both residue and atom labels, you may have to expand the figure generated to see all of the axes labels.  We recommend that you set a ceiling value of zero when using this 2-d graphing feature.  The *.pcr file (from finedata.txt) is parsed based on either the Lennard Jones criteria OR Coulombic interaction  criteria.  Hence, if you do not use a ceiling value you may see LJ interactions that are beyond the LJ criteria, but are present because this particular interaction meets the Coulombic criteria (and vice-versa).  Usually, you would not set a floor value unless you were trying to narrowly bracket your map over a particular differential energy region, but we have provided it anyway.  For most applications, just leave the floor unchecked.  We also have provided a "Back" button and "Panning" button to the graph menu bar for the users convenience in examining these plots.  Note that our Analysis feature is restricted to the finedata.txt map because of size or plotting time restrictions.

Finally, we'd like to especially acknowledge the creator of Matplotlib, John D. Hunter, who died from complications arising from cancer treatment in August of 2012.   As you will hopefully see, Matplotlib is pretty awesome and hopefully we did it some justice here.  If you agree, please consider making a donation to the John Hunter Memorial Fund at www.numfocus.org/johnhunter/.  The single Windows executable is made possible by PYInstaller from the PYInstaller Group at www.pyinstaller.org.  The OpenContact GUI was created with the help of PyQt (www.riverbankcomputing.com), which is available under the GNU General Public License.

When citing OpenContact, please use:

# Citation for OpenContact
Krall A, Brunn J, Kankanala S, Peters MH. 2014. A simple contact mapping algorithm for identifying potential peptide mimetics in protein-protein interaction partners. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics 82(9):2253-62.

Article first published online: 14 MAY 2014 | DOI: 10.1002/prot.24592
This article is OpenAccess at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/enhanced/doi/10.1002/prot.24592/


HAPPY Mapping!

M.P.